The CAMS solar radiation services provide historical values (2004 to present) of global (GHI), direct (BHI) and diffuse (DHI) solar irradiation, as well as direct normal irradiation (BNI). The aim is to fulfil the needs of European and national policy development and the requirements of both commercial and public downstream services, e.g. for planning, monitoring, efficiency improvements and the integration of solar energy systems into energy supply grids.

For clear-sky conditions, an irradiation time series is provided for any location in the world using information on aerosol, ozone and water vapour from the CAMS global forecasting system. Other properties, such as ground albedo and ground elevation, are also taken into account. Similar time series are available for cloudy (or "all sky") conditions but, since the high-resolution cloud information is directly inferred from satellite observations, these are currently only available inside the field-of-view of the Meteosat Second Generation (MSG) satellite, which is roughly Europe, Africa, the Atlantic Ocean and the Middle East.

Data is offered via the Copernicus Atmosphere Data Store in both ASCII and netCDF format. Additionally, an ASCII "expert mode" format can be selected which contains in addition to the irradiation, all the input data used in their calculation (aerosol optical properties, water vapour concentration, etc). This additional information is only meaningful in the time frame at which the calculation is performed and so is only available at 1-minute time steps in universal time (UT). 